\input texinfo
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c
@c This is the Carbs Linux documentation, see the @copying section for LICENSE
@c details.
@c
@c In order to keep the file easily readable and editable, always seperate
@c with comment lines like the ones above and below. Those lines should reach
@c to 80 characters total. Try to keep characters per line below 80, and do NOT
@c exceed 100 unless you are adding a really long link or something. Also see
@c the Contribution guidelines, which are written contribution.texi for any more
@c information.

@c Start of header
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@settitle Carbs Linux User Manual
@setfilename carbslinux.info

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2020 Cem Keylan

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
Documentation License.''
@end copying

@dircategory System administration
@direntry
* Carbs Linux: (carbslinux).            Carbs Linux User Manual
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Carbs Linux User Manual

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1fill
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c End of Header
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Carbs Linux User Manual

This is the full documentation of @url{https://carbslinux.org, Carbs Linux},
from the details of the distribution, installation, to the package manager. It
is not yet complete.

@ifplaintext
You can build and install the @command{info} package in order to view this
documentation with the info reader. It is divided into sections and easier to
read.
@end ifplaintext

@ifhtml
This documentation is also available in the distribution by the
@command{carbs-docs} package, which can be read by either running
@code{info carbslinux} or reading @file{/usr/share/doc/carbslinux.txt} with your
favorite pager. You can install either the @command{info} or @command{texinfo}
for doing the first.
@end ifhtml

@end ifnottex


@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@summarycontents
@contents

@menu
* Installation::                   Installing Carbs Linux
* Package Manager::                Carbs Linux Packaging Tools
* Contribution Guidelines::        Contributing to Carbs Linux
* Init System::                    Configuring the init system
* GNU Free Documentation License:: Copying Conditions

@detailmenu

--- Detailed Menu Listing ---

Installation

* Preparing Environment::       Getting ready to chroot
* Chroot::                      Going inside your new system
* System Configuration::        Customizing for your personal use
* Kernel::                      Compiling your own kernel
* Making your system bootable:: Installing init and bootloader
* Post-installation::           Acquiring more packages and repositories

Package Manager

* Usage::                       Using Carbs Packaging Tools
* Environment Variables::       Values that affect the operation of CPT
* Hooks::                       Using hooks to customize the package manager operations
* Packaging System::            More detail on creating packages
* Rsync Repositories::          Information on using or creating rsync repositories

Init System

* Configuring Init::       Ways to configure the init system
* Init Hooks::             Adding your personal commands to the init system
* Changing Init Program::  Replacing the default busybox init with something new
@end detailmenu
@end menu


@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@include install.texi
@include cpt.texi
@include contribution.texi
@include init.texi


@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@unnumbered GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi


@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@bye
